Protests over China’s Covid restrictions have spread to several cities, with demonstrations in Shanghai, Beijing, Chengdu, Wuhan and Guangzhou following a deadly fire in the far west of the country. We would like to speak to people in China about the situation in their country. Have you or people you know taken part in the protests? What effect do you think they could have? What are your concerns? We would also like to hear from people in China on what ordinary life is like under Covid restrictions. What is your daily life like and how do the rules affect you? 在新疆乌鲁木齐发生致命火灾后，反对严厉的防疫措施的抗议已蔓延至多个城市，在上海、北京、成都、武汉和广州都发生了抗议。 我们想跟在中国大陆生活的人谈谈他们情况。您或您认识的人是否参加了抗议活动？您认为它们会产生什么影响？您有什么顾虑？ 我们也想听听在中国大陆防疫措施下的的日常生活是什么样的，这些措施对您的生活有什么影响？ Share your experiences If you are 18 years or over, you can get in touch with the Guardian Community team via the encrypted messaging app Signal and contacting us on +44(0)7766780300 – or via WhatsApp by clicking here or adding +44(0)7766780300. 如果您年满 18 岁，您可以通过加密应用程序 Signal并拨打 +44(0)7766780300 联系卫报– 或者通过 WhatsApp 点击此处 （clicking here) 或添加 +44(0)7766780300。 You can also get in touch by filling in the form below. Your responses are secure as the form is encrypted and only the Guardian has access to your contributions. One of our journalists will be in contact before we publish, so please do leave contact details. 您可以填写下面的加密表格与我们联系。您的回复是安全的，因为表单是加密的，只有卫报会看到您的回应，我们的一名记者可能会和您联系以获取更多信息, 所以希望您可以留下您的联系方式。 We will only use the data you provide us for the purpose of the feature. We will delete any personal data when we no longer require it for this purpose. For more information please see our terms of service and privacy policy. 我们只会将您提供给我们的数据用于撰写文章。当我们不再需要时，我们将删除任何个人数据。有关更多信息，请参阅我们的服务条款（terms of service) 和隐私政策 (privacy policy)。 Please note that while we’d like to hear from you, your security is most important. We recognise it may not always be safe or appropriate to record or share your experiences – so please think about this when considering whether to get in touch with the Guardian. 请注意，虽然我们希望收到您的来信，但您的安全是最重要的。我们明白记录或分享您的经历可能并不总是安全或合适的——因此在考虑是否与卫报联系时请考虑这一点。 IP addresses will be recorded on a third party webserver, so for true anonymity use our SecureDrop service, however anything submitted on the form below will be encrypted and confidential if you wish to continue. IP地址将记录在第三方Web服务器上，因此为了实现真正的匿名性，请使用我们的安全投送服务，但是，如果您愿意继续，提交到以下表单的任何内容都将被加密和保密。 If you’re having trouble using the form, click here. 如果您在使用表单时遇到问题，请单击此处 （here)。 在此处阅读服务条款。