“Friends and relatives have been messaging and calling me more worried than Ukrainians,” says Alex Borbely, an Australian living in the Ukrainian capital, Kyiv. Borbely is one of several Australians who have told Guardian Australia they will stay in the country despite the advice from the Australian government to leave immediately due to the security threat. “I guess when it’s something unknown and far away, it feels stronger and more threatening,” he says. “When you’re in the middle of it, on the ground, and you see the reactions of people around you who are operating as normal, still going to bars and cafes, there is no sense of fear.”\nThere are about 1,400 Australians in Ukraine, according to the foreign affairs minister, Marise Payne, who said on Tuesday the advice to leave was “a cautious and prudent step because the security situation is unpredictable”. The foreign affairs department has also encouraged Australian citizens and residents in Ukraine to register their whereabouts through a dedicated page on its website.\nUkrainian authorities have urged the public to stay calm. Earlier this month, they claimed Russia was trying to destabilise Ukraine and sow panic by launching a massive cyber-attack on its government websites. The Russian government has denied any involvement. A wave of false bomb threats in schools has also added to anxiety, although it is unclear whether any political motive is behind them, and schools in some Russian cities have experienced similar threats. On Tuesday Ukraine’s president, Volodymyr Zelensky, tried to assuage public anxiety and said the decision of Australia, the United States, UK, Germany and Canada to withdraw the families of their diplomats from Kyiv “didn’t mean an inevitable escalation”. The defence minister, Oleksiy Reznikov, told journalists in Kyiv that so far there were no grounds to expect a full-scale invasion.\nWhile daily life in Kyiv shows no signs of panic, Ukrainians and foreign residents alike are considering their options. Borbely, who is from Sydney and has lived in Ukraine for more than three years, doesn’t intend to leave yet. “I understand there is some danger,” he says. “People here don’t seriously believe, at least those who I have talked to, that there will be a full-scale conflict. This is my feeling at the moment too.”\nHe says he is thinking of heading to the western part of Ukraine if there is “some action”. Ken Herbert, an IT project manager from Wollongong, also sees no reason to leave just yet. He moved to Ukraine in 2019, fell in love with the country, and made Kyiv his home. Nevertheless, he has prepared for the worst. He has a bag packed, a small stockpile of food, a sleeping bag and an air mattress if he needs to escape urgently. He also has a plan of how to get out of Ukraine in case direct combat reaches the capital, which he doesn’t believe is likely. “I’m not expecting too much to happen. A lot of media is hyping the situation much worse than it is,” he says. “The warning of the Australian government is very much premature.” ‘Alert but not alarmed’ Hugh Simpson, a former military officer and hostile environment trainer, now the chief executive of a software company, says he understands the federal government’s perspective of trying to protect its citizens, but has decided to stay in Ukraine and rely on his own risk perception. “We are alert but not alarmed. We are monitoring the situation through both official and non-official channels,” he says. “Choosing to stay is not something I have done without preparing to ensure the safety of my staff and the continuation of my business.”\nHe declines to disclose his contingency plans, but says the most important thing anyone can do is have a bag and key documents ready, keep an eye on the news, and trust their gut. The latest warnings have prompted Gold Coast native Brayden McKay and his Ukrainian fiancée to move to Australia months earlier than they initially planned. An English teacher who has lived in Kyiv for a little over two years, he says life carries on as usual, and “chaos and crisis” are observed primarily among English-speaking foreigners. Yet, he prefers to play it safe. “It’s good that the [Australian] government is being cautious because we never know what will happen. It should be taken seriously,” he says. “A lot of us here think a full-scale invasion wouldn’t make sense for the Russian government, but something will happen. We just don’t know what and when. Uncertainty is one of the scariest things.”