A New Zealand minister has had to revise her anti-racism social media posts featuring a popular brand of chocolate, after the prime minister requested their removal because it breached cabinet rules about product promotion. Green party MP Marama Davidson posted a video of herself to Instagram on Monday holding five blocks of Whittakers creamy milk chocolate, which have recently been rebranded with the Māori translation Miraka Kirīmi in honour of the upcoming Māori language week – te wiki o te reo Māori. She also posted photographs on Twitter and Facebook. The company’s decision to change the name has prompted both racist backlash and pledges of support since its release, earlier in the month. In her video, Davidson said she bought the bars – despite not liking the flavour –because “it is the right thing to do to support te wiki o te reo Māori, to support te reo Māori being everywhere and anywhere it needs to go”. But on Tuesday, Davidson – who is the minister for the prevention of family and sexual violence – received a firm word from the top office that her video was in breach of the cabinet rules manual, which prevents ministers from promoting or endorsing a product or service.\nSpeaking to media on Tuesday afternoon, the prime minister, Jacinda Ardern said it was clear that Davidson’s intent was to promote the use of te reo Māori. “But we do have rules that are very clear around ensuring that you’re not seen to specifically endorse particular products,” Ardern said. “I will ask the Cabinet Office to make sure they are in touch with the minister to be more clear on how these rules apply.”\nArdern took no issue with the promotion of te reo Māori. “Here we have companies embracing what is unique about New Zealand and there are a range of companies and brands taking those steps, and I think it is all part of our growth and evolution as a country.” Ardern said it was up to the Cabinet office to remedy the situation but advised Davidson to remove the post. “You can see the intent here was the promotion of te reo Māori but we do have to make sure that we uphold a really clear standard on promoting products,” Ardern said. Davidson was initially defiant and told reporters she would not remove her posts because she was “promoting organisations who are stepping up to promote te reo Māori and … pushing back against the racism that arose by something as simple, as beautiful as more use of te reo Māori.” But the minister has since revised her posts to make it clear she was promoting Māori language and not the chocolate company. Davidson removed written references to the chocolate company, Whittaker, but kept the images and videos of the chocolate bars with their branding. In her revised posts, Davidson wrote: “Edit: leeeeeeeets try this again,” followed by comments about not liking the flavour, but loving te reo Māori. In a statement on facebook, Davidson said she had spoken with the Cabinet office, which had reminded her of the guidelines around not promoting and endorsing products. “I do want to make sure the intent of my post is clear: that while it’s great to see any organisation use and support te reo Māori – it is te reo Māori I am celebrating.” “My post joins other voices in the communities who are speaking up against that racism, and shows my support for naturalising te reo Māori anywhere and everywhere.”