It’s been a significant day in the Russia-Ukraine war, with a round of missile strikes in the morning that the Ukraine’s foreign ministry described as “one of the most massive” attacks so far. Here are all the day’s key developments: Belarus’ state-run BelTA news agency reported that a Ukrainian S-300 missile had fallen onto the territory of Belarus during one of Russia’s largest missile attacks against Ukraine since the start of the war. The Ukrainian ambassador was summoned to the foreign ministry in Minsk to receive a formal protest after the spokesperson for the ministry of foreign affairs said the missile landing on Belarussian soil was “extremely serious”. Russia launched a new wave of missile attacks across Ukraine on Thursday morning, with Ukraine’s air force claiming it shot down 54 Russian winged cruise missiles out of 69 launched into Ukraine from Rostov in Russia, the Caspian sea and the Black sea. The mayor of Kyiv, Vitali Klitschko, stated that three people were known to be injured in the country’s capital, including a 14-year-old girl. Two people had been rescued from a private house that had been struck by debris. Klitschko said 40% of the capital’s consumers are without electricity after the missile attack. Later, the emergency services spokesperson, Oleksandr Khorunzhy, stated that in today’s attacks five people were injured. There were widespread reports of power outages as residents in cities across Ukraine were warned to stay in air raid shelters, charge their devices and stock up on water where possible. There were also explosions reported in Kharkiv, and Ukraine’s air force stated that overnight it had destroyed 11 Shahed drones. Italy’s prime minister, Giorgia Meloni, pledged that Rome would continue to help Kyiv’s war effort and that she would visit before the end of February. The UK’s defence minster Ben Wallace has said the UK will commit £2.3bn in aid to Ukraine in 2023. We’re closing the blog for the evening, but we’ll open again tomorrow. Thanks for following today.