President Vladimir Putin has ordered his country’s defence industry chiefs to ensure the Russian army gets all the weapons, equipment and military hardware it needs “in the shortest possible timeframes” to fight in Ukraine. Putin’s remarks came just days after he pledged to give his army anything it asks for in a meeting with Russia’s top military officials. Russian forces have started demolishing a theatre in occupied Mariupol in southern Ukraine that was the site of a deadly airstrike believed to have killed hundreds of civilians, according to an aide to the city’s exiled Ukrainian mayor. Ukraine’s culture minister, Oleksandr Tkachenko, said the move was an “attempt to hide forever the evidence of the deliberate killing of Ukrainians by Russians”. North Korea’s foreign ministry denied a media report it supplied munitions to Russia, calling it “groundless,” and denounced the United States for providing lethal weapons to Ukraine, the North’s official KCNA news agency reported on Friday. Japan’s Tokyo Shimbun reported earlier that North Korea had shipped munitions, including artillery shells, to Russia via train through their border last month and that additional shipments were expected in the coming weeks. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, posted a video on Friday saying he was back at work in Kyiv after his landmark visit to Washington this week. “I am in my office. We are working toward victory,” he said in the video posted to his Telegram channel. Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s visit to the White House confirmed that Ukraine and the US are “strategic partners” for the first time in history, the Ukrainian leader’s most senior adviser has said. Andriy Yermak, the head of the Ukrainian president’s office, told the Guardian that the trip on Wednesday had cemented Zelenskiy’s bond with the US president, Joe Biden – and with senior US Republicans. Russian forces shelled the recently liberated Kherson region more than 60 times on Thursday, according to the head of the region’s military administration, Yaroslav Yanushevych. Two civilians were killed by Russian shelling on the city of Kherson in southern Ukraine Friday morning, according to the regional prosecutor’s office. Two people were injured after a car bomb exploded in the Russian-occupied city of Melitopol in south-eastern Ukraine, according to a local pro-Moscow official. Vladimir Rogov, a Russian-appointed official in Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia province, described the incident as a “terrorist attack” carried out by “militants of the Kyiv regime” to the Russian state media. Ivan Fedorov, the exiled mayor of Melitopol, wrote on Telegram that eyewitnesses reported a car was “blown up”. A senior Russian diplomat has said that talks on security guarantees for Russia cannot take place while Nato instructors and “mercenaries” remain in Ukraine, and while western arms supplies to the country continue. In an interview with the Russian state-owned news agency TASS, Alexander Darchiev, head of the Russian foreign ministry’s North America department, said talks would be premature “until the flood of weapons and financing for the [Ukrainian president Volodymyr] Zelenskiy regime stops, American and Nato servicemen/mercenaries/instructors are withdrawn”. Russia’s ambassador to the US, Anatoly Antonov, warned the risk of a clash between the US and Russia was “high” and compared US-Russia relations to an “ice age” in comments reported by the Russian state-owned Tass news agency. The Kremlin on Thursday accused the US of fighting a proxy war against Russia, after Washington boosted military support for Ukraine and hosted President Volodymyr Zelenskiy in the White House and Congress. The Kremlin has claimed that Russia has made significant progress towards “demilitarising” Ukraine – one of the initial goals of Russia’s invasion 10 months ago. Dmitry Peskov, the Kremlin’s spokesperson, was asked during a briefing about comments by President Vladimir Putin that Ukraine’s military-industrial complex “if not completely reset to zero, is getting there fast”. The top Russian-installed official in Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia region said on Friday that shelling of the Russian-controlled Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, Europe’s largest, had “almost stopped”. Speaking on Russian state television, Russian-installed regional governor Yevgeny Balitsky said that Russian troops would not leave the nuclear plant, and that it would never return to Ukrainian control. Australia’s financial intelligence agency has warned Russian paramilitary groups are soliciting cryptocurrency donations to buy weapons and that Australians have donated to terrorist organisations overseas. Senior executives at Australian Transaction Reports and Analysis Centre (Austrac) also said cryptocurrency has become a “standard part of the money-laundering tool kit” for organised crime groups in Australia. Air raid sirens were sounding shortly before 7am in Mykolaiv, in southern Ukraine, the regional governor Vitalli Kim indicated on Telegram, in a series of posts saying, “Air alarm”. Kherson governor Yaroslav Yanushevych also posted an air raid alarm, but shortly afterwards said that the alert was over. A Russian opposition politician has filed a legal challenge over President Vladimir Putin’s use of the word “war” to describe the conflict in Ukraine. Putin on Thursday publicly acknowledged the situation as a “war” for the first time since he ordered his troops to invade Ukraine in February, after 10 months of calling his campaign a “special military operation”. The White House announced a further $1.85bn in aid including, for the first time, Patriot air defence missiles to protect Ukraine’s infrastructure, already crippled by Russian attacks. The US is imposing fresh sanctions on 10 Russian naval entities over Russian operations against Ukrainian ports, the US secretary of state, Antony Blinken, said. Six of the entities targeted in the latest sanctions were designated for operating or having operated in both the defence and related material sector and the marine sector of the Russian economy, the US state department said on Thursday. The Russian president, Vladimir Putin, said the Patriot air defence the US was supplying to Ukraine was an old weapons system that Russia would be able to “knock down”. “The Patriot air defence is an outdated system,” Putin told reporters in Moscow, adding that Russia’s S-300 system outperformed it. A Russian-installed official in a part of Ukraine’s southern Kherson region controlled by Russian forces was killed on Thursday in a car bomb attack, according to the pro-Moscow local administration. Andrei Shtepa, the pro-Russian head of the village of Lyubimovka in the Kherson region, reportedly died after a car blew up, it said, blaming “Ukrainian terrorists”. The report has not been able to be independently verified. German authorities said they arrested an employee of the country’s foreign intelligence service on suspicion of treason for allegedly passing information to Russia. The suspect, a German citizen identified only as Carsten L, was arrested in Berlin on Wednesday, federal prosecutors said in a statement. It comes just days after Austria said it had identified a 39-year-old Greek citizen it suspected of spying for Russia. Vladimir Putin called Israel’s prime minister-designate, Benjamin Netanyahu, on Thursday to congratulate him on forming a government and to discuss the situation in Ukraine, according to a statement from Netanyahu’s office. Netanyahu told Putin “he hopes a way will be found quickly to end the war [with Ukraine] and the suffering caused by it”, it said.