This blog is closed. Live coverage of the war in Ukraine will resume later. A summary follows. Rolls-Royce Germany has provided two super power generators to Ukraine, the country’s ministry of health announced on Saturday. In a statement, the ministry of health said: “One such generator is capable of providing the work of not only one building, but all the buildings, if it is a large regional hospital.” The US has announced that it will be boycotting the St. Petersburg International Forum that is set to take place in Russia later this month. “We urge governments and companies to join our boycott and send a clear message that there is no “business as usual” while Russian forces brutalize Ukraine,” US State department spokesperson Ned Price said. Russia’s military has set up another field hospital due to heavy casualties. Kyiv Independent reports. The Russian military is setting up an additional field hospital in the village of Shebekino in Russia’s Belgorod Oblast, according to the general staff of the Armed Forces of Ukraine. Ukraine remains in control of the Azot chemical plant in Sievierodonetsk where hundreds of civilians are sheltering, the region’s governor said on Saturday, after a Russia-backed separatist claimed 300 to 400 Ukrainian fighters were also trapped there. Ukraine has said some 800 people were hiding in several bomb shelters underneath the Azot plant, including about 200 employees and 600 residents of Sievierodonetsk. A United Nations commission has arrived in Ukraine on Saturday to investigate war crimes. Deputy Speaker of Ukraine’s parliament Olena Kondratyuk said that the commission’s goal is to record war crimes and human rights violations. Approximately 10,000 Ukrainian soldiers have been killed since Russia’s invasion of the country in February, according to a military adviser to Ukrainian president Volodymyr Zelenskiy. He added that the daily numbers of Ukrainian casualties were around “200 to 300 die, no less.” The European Border and Coast Guard Agency says that 2.5 million Ukrainians have returned to their home country since the war started in February.The agency also said that 5.5 million Ukrainians have fled to the EU since the war began. Russia is attempting to repeat the Holodomor, a man-made famine in Soviet Ukraine from 1932 to 1933 that killed millions of people under the Soviet regime, the head of the office of the Ukrainian president has said. On Saturday, Andriy Yermak, President Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s office head, said: “Russians shell Ukrainian fields with firebombs. Those creating global food crisis attempt to reconstruct Holodomor.” The armed forces of Ukraine have received new Starlink satellite communication systems from SpaceX founder and CEO Elon Musk. The Ukrainian defense ministry said that the Starlinks will be used for its intelligence forces’ “special missions.” The German chancellor, Olaf Scholz, is planning a visit to Kyiv alongside the French president, Emmanuel Macron, and the Italian prime minister, Mario Draghi. The leaders want to meet the Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, prior to the G7 summit.