Even before Vladimir Putin declared a hunt for “national traitors” and a “fifth column” over his invasion of Ukraine this week, anti-war activists had faced increasing pressure, including police torture, intimidation tactics, work dismissals and other threats. In a police station in Moscow earlier this month, an anti-war protester managed to record her own beating as officers threatened her for taking part in peaceful demonstrations that have already seen nearly 15,000 people detained. “Place of study?” a policeman asks the student in the recording, which she published online. When she didn’t answer, they hit her. “You’ll have a bit of a bruise. Get up, try to remember.” Then they hit her again. In an interview with the Guardian, another student, Anastasia, 18, described being threatened for hours after being arrested for taking to the streets and chanting “No to war.” “They told me they would beat me and that they were going to throw us to the homeless, rape us,” she said. She added she had not been beaten but that officers grew violent with other activists as they refused to cooperate. “I think they would have said anything to get me to sign [the court order]… just not to have to deal with us.” Russia’s war has above all affected the lives of millions of Ukrainians, turning busy cities like Mariupol and Kharkiv into war-scarred battlegrounds and leaving thousands dead.\nBut Russians have also woken up in a different country, one seeking internal enemies to blame for the country’s descent into economic isolation and hardship. In a dark speech on Wednesday, Vladimir Putin laid out his vision for the new Russia, calling for a “cleansing” of “national traitors” in what sounded like an announcement of open season on dissidents. The west “are going to bet on the so-called fifth column, on national traitors,” said Putin using language that critics have called fascist. “The Russian people will be able to distinguish true patriots from scum and traitors and simply spit them out like a fly that accidentally flew into their mouths. “I am convinced that such a natural and necessary cleansing of society will only strengthen our country,” he added. For those with the temerity to oppose the war, it is clear who Putin has in mind.\n“It’s about us all. You can choose a role for me [from the speech]. A traitor, a fascist,” said Anastasia, the student. “It’s an attack on everyone who is against this war.” The war has accelerated Russia’s slide from authoritarianism to totalitarianism. For years, police have tightened their grip on the opposition, both jailing top critics like Alexei Navalny and learning how to put down large protests. “You can see this as the result of these years of preparations,” said Daniil Beilinson of OVD-Info, which has published a report on official pressure on the anti-war movement. Now the launch of the war has untied the hands of both law enforcement and dangerous patriotic elements. Pro-Kremlin activists have adopted the letter Z, a tactical symbol painted on some Russian military vehicles in Ukraine, as a symbol of support for the war. The state-financed outlet RT has sold T-shirts with the symbol on it, while others have used it to threaten opponents of the war. When Marina Davydova found a white Z graffitied on her doorway at home and suspected her phone was tapped, friends began to tell her it was time to go. The theatre critic had been an early and vocal critic of Russia’s war in Ukraine, publishing a petition to oppose the invasion. Now, she was receiving a torrent of emailed threats. When she left the country, video of her leaving her flat was leaked online. Even at the border, she was interrogated by a guard who said that her Schengen visa was not enough reason to leave the country. The speed of the transformation surprised her, she said. “Even a month ago I couldn’t have imagined this,” she said from an undisclosed location in Europe. Of Putin’s speech about “national traitors” and a “fifth column,” she said: “Before, this rhetoric was used only by [radicals], but now it is being uttered by the president. It’s horrible!” Others had faced backlash at work or other forms of pressure for opposing the war. One Russian doctor said he had fled the country to Serbia after sharing an anti-war petition with colleagues. “At first they suggested I resign but then they gave me a back way out” by taking his remaining vacation, he said. “We were living normally a month ago, what is this fucking shit all around us now?” Other professional groups have been forced to hide the names on their anti-war petitions to protect themselves from violent reprisals. Dmitry Peskov, the Kremlin spokesperson, told reporters on Thursday that all these people were effectively traitors. “They vanish from our lives on their own,” he said. “Some quit their jobs, some leave active service, some leave the country and move to others. That’s how [Russia] is cleansed. Some break the law and are punished by the courts.” For some forced to leave, they can barely recognise the country where they once lived. “I have a different Russia,” Davydova wrote in a post about leaving the country. “It didn’t begin a ‘special operation.’ It held festivals, organised unbelievable exhibits, made foreigners fall in love with here. That Russia itself has been abused, raped, declared an enemy and arrested. I do not know if she will be free. I hope she just will exist.”