It was once a superstition only among Ukrainian air crew: the word “last”, especially in the context of a last or final meeting, should be avoided as it denotes a premonition of death. In its place air crew would say krajne, which translates very roughly to English as “on the edge”. Since Russia’s full-scale invasion of Ukraine, krajne has gained far wider usage, employed by soldiers and some civilians in a country where everyone knows someone who is serving at the front. The conflict is spawning a new lexicon. Some of the words and phrases that have entered wider usage in Ukrainian society date back to the beginning of the war in 2014, others to military usage in the Soviet era, military slang that has become popularised again, and others are entirely new coinages. There is “avatar” for a drunken soldier, derived from a Ukrainian expression to get drunk or “blue” – a reference to the James Cameron blockbuster about blue aliens. A “chandelier” describes a white phosphorous airburst named for the falling points of brilliant white light, “at zero” is the frontline, and the chilling neologism “to the basement” describes the risk of what will happen to Ukrainians if captured by Russian forces. “A lot of the new words began appearing in 2014,” says Les Beley of the Potebnya linguistics institute at the National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine. “But some words are even older … In general, the process is that there is certain lexicon of words that had a narrow usage in the military that now have a much wider context. “That includes some army slang that was common in the Russian and the Ukrainian language that had its origin in the Soviet war in Afghanistan. “Two-hundreds” was military slang for dead and wounded whose origin was the fact that when bodies were transported from Afghanistan in that era, the weight of the coffin was 200 kilos.” The incursion into civilian language of military slang in times of war – and other neologisms - is not a new phenomenon. As conflict alters societies, it also changes the way they talk about conflict. Some language serves to create a distance from the horrible reality or reinforce social solidarity, but in other cases it provides a useful tool to talk about the reality of the experience. “We have all the people serving in the army. We have millions of volunteers,” says Beley. “This process is part of reality we live, and this reality requires this lexicon. Language constantly changes and adapts.” Some slang has emerged as an ironic response to Russia’s use of euphemism, he says, both officially – calling the war a “special operation” for instance – and more widely among Russian soldiers. Perhaps most famous in this sense have been Ukrainian memes that use the word for “cotton” for explosions targeting Russian forces. “Russians don’t talk about an explosion. They’ll often say klapok, which is a loud noise or clap. If you run those letters through Google Translate, it will also come up with the word for ‘cotton’, which is used to mock the Russians,” Beley explains. Some of the derogatory terms levelled at the Russian invaders have a history that goes back centuries. One coined during the current war has been “orc”, borrowed from JRR Tolkein’s Lord of the Rings, although the origin of is current usage is obscure. Beley also notes how modes of communication in emails and text have changed during the invasion. “We have a new set of rules. In the past the etiquette was always simply to say, ‘Hello.’ Now it is usual to start with ‘How are you’ and end the conversation with ‘Take care of yourself’.”