Thank you for joining us for today’s live coverage of the war in Ukraine. We will be pausing our live reporting overnight and returning in the morning. In the meantime, you can read our comprehensive summary of the day’s events below. Russian President, Vladimir Putin, won the endorsement of the Iranian supreme leader for Russia’s invasion of Ukraine during a visit to Tehran on Tuesday. Ayatollah Ali Khamenei told Putin: “War is a harsh and difficult issue, and Iran is not at all pleased that ordinary people suffer from it, but in the case of Ukraine if you had not taken the initiative, the other side would have caused the war with its own initiative … If the road is open to Nato, it knows no boundaries and if it was not stopped in Ukraine they would start the same war some time later under the pretext of Crimea.” Khamenei sdded that Tehran and Moscow needed to stay vigilant against “western deception”, calling for long-term cooperation between Iran and Russia. “Iran and Russia’s long-term cooperation is greatly, deeply beneficial to both countries,” he said. Putin said progress has been made that may allow Russia to lift the blockade on Ukrainian wheat. “I want to thank you for your mediation efforts,” he told Recep Tayyip Erdoğan, his Turkish counterpart, during a trip to Tehran in comments released by the Kremlin. “With your mediation, we have moved forward. Not all issues have yet been resolved, but the fact that there is movement is already good.” A senior Russian security official said that peace in Ukraine would be on Moscow’s terms. Dmitry Medvedev, Russia’s former president who is now deputy head of its security council, said: “Russia will achieve all its goals. There will be peace – on our terms.” Putin claims Moscow has not seen any desire from Ukraine to fulfil the terms of what he described as a preliminary peace deal agreed to in March. When asked about a possible meeting with Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy, the Russian president replied that Kyiv had not stuck to the terms of a preliminary peace deal he said had been “practically achieved” in March. “The final result of course... depends on the willingness of the contracting parties to implement the agreements that were reached. Today we see the powers in Kyiv have no such desire.” Ukraine does not want the war to last into winter because it would give Russian forces time to dig in and make any Ukrainian counter-offensive more difficult. President Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s chief of staff, Andry Yermak, said: “It is very important for us not to enter the winter. After winter, when the Russians will have more time to dig in, it will certainly be more difficult.” Pentagon spokesperson John Kirby claimed Russia is laying the groundwork for the annexation of more Ukrainian territory, and installing illegitimate proxy officials in areas under its control. Kirby, unveiling what he said was US intelligence, said Russia was seeking to establish the rouble as the default currency and force residents to apply for citizenship. Volodymyr Zelenskiy says he expects “significant results” for Ukraine following his wife’s trip to Washington on Tuesday. “Increasing American support for Ukraine, additional assistance to protect people from Russian terror, addressing humanitarian needs are all the tasks of the ongoing visit of the First Lady of Ukraine to the United States,” he said. Ukraine’s first lady Olena Zelenska met her US counterpart Jill Biden on Tuesday ahead of her appearance on Wednesday before members of Congress. The EU is set to add Russia’s biggest bank Sberbank and the head of giant zinc and copper firm UMMC to its black list of individuals and companies. A new list of 48 officials and nine entities to be blacklisted, prepared by the EU foreign affairs service, also includes leaders of the Night Wolves motorcycle club, actors, politicians, the deputy head of a Russian security service, family members of sanctioned oligarchs and military people. Putin said gas giant Gazprom will fulfil all its obligations “in full” and mocked the west for relying on green energy. “Gazprom has fulfilled, is fulfilling and will fulfil its obligations in full,” he told reporters in Tehran. Ukrainian farmers are to receive support from the US government in the form of a $100m (£83m) programme intended to provide supplies to maintain future harvests. The money from the US agency for international development (USAID) aims to boost Ukraine’s agricultural exports. The governor of the southern Ukraine region of Mykolaiv has offered a $100 (£83) reward for anyone who can identify people collaborating with Russia. Vitaliy Kim offered the compensation in exchange for information about “those who reveal to the occupiers the places of deployment of Ukrainian troops” or help them establish the coordinates of potential targets. Another six French-made Caesar artillery guns are “on their way” to Ukraine, France’s foreign minister has confirmed. Twelve of the guns, prized for their accuracy and mobility, have already been delivered to Ukraine and “the six others are on their way,” Catherine Colonna told a Senate commission. The United States will announce a new weapons package for Ukraine in the coming days, a government official said. It is expected to include mobile rocket launchers knows as Himars, and various artillery munitions, Reuters reports. US senators have backed Sweden and Finland in their bid to join Nato. The foreign relations committee of the US Senate unanimously approving a resolution to ratify their membership on Tuesday. A special commission to control the use of weapons provided to Ukraine has been set up, according to Ukrainian President Volodymyr Zelenskiy. “Our partners are fully informed about how we use the weapons provided. But in order to put an end to any manipulations of Russian propagandists and those who help them in Ukraine or somewhere else, such an additional parliamentary control tool will enter into force,” he said.