It’s nearly 9pm in Kyiv. That’s it from me, Léonie Chao-Fong, and the Russia-Ukraine war blog today. Here’s where things stand: President Vladimir Putin has ordered his country’s defence industry chiefs to ensure the Russian army gets all the weapons, equipment and military hardware it needs “in the shortest possible timeframes” to fight in Ukraine. Putin’s remarks came just days after he pledged to give his army anything it asks for in a meeting with Russia’s top military officials. Russian forces have started demolishing a theatre in occupied Mariupol in southern Ukraine that was the site of a deadly airstrike believed to have killed hundreds of civilians, according to an aide to the city’s exiled Ukrainian mayor. Ukraine’s culture minister, Oleksandr Tkachenko, said the move was an “attempt to hide forever the evidence of the deliberate killing of Ukrainians by Russians”. Russia’s ambassador to the US, Anatoly Antonov, warned the risk of a clash between the US and Russia was “high” and compared US-Russia relations to an “ice age” in comments reported by the Russian state-owned Tass news agency. The Kremlin on Thursday accused the US of fighting a proxy war against Russia, after Washington boosted military support for Ukraine and hosted President Volodymyr Zelenskiy in the White House and Congress. Russian forces shelled the recently liberated Kherson region more than 60 times on Thursday, according to the head of the region’s military administration, Yaroslav Yanushevych. Two civilians were killed by Russian shelling on the city of Kherson in southern Ukraine Friday morning, according to the regional prosecutor’s office. Two people were injured after a car bomb exploded in the Russian-occupied city of Melitopol in south-eastern Ukraine, according to a local pro-Moscow official. Vladimir Rogov, a Russian-appointed official in Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia province, described the incident as a “terrorist attack” carried out by “militants of the Kyiv regime” to the Russian state media. Ivan Fedorov, the exiled mayor of Melitopol, wrote on Telegram that eyewitnesses reported a car was “blown up”. The Kremlin has claimed that Russia has made significant progress towards “demilitarising” Ukraine – one of the initial goals of Russia’s invasion 10 months ago. Dmitry Peskov, the Kremlin’s spokesperson, was asked during a briefing about comments by President Vladimir Putin that Ukraine’s military-industrial complex “if not completely reset to zero, is getting there fast”. Volodymyr Zelenskiy posted a video on Friday saying he was back at work in Kyiv after his landmark visit to Washington this week. “I am in my office. We are working toward victory,” he said in the video posted to his Telegram channel. Volodymyr Zelenskiy’s visit to the White House confirmed that Ukraine and the US are “strategic partners” for the first time in history, the Ukrainian leader’s most senior adviser has said. Andriy Yermak, the head of the Ukrainan president’s office, told the Guardian that the trip on Wednesday had cemented Zelenskiy’s bond with the US president, Joe Biden – and with senior US Republicans. North Korea’s foreign ministry denied a media report it had supplied munitions to Russia, calling it “groundless,” and denounced the US for providing lethal weapons to Ukraine, North Korea’s official KCNA news agency reported. The White House yesterday said the Wagner Group took delivery of an arms shipment from North Korea to help bolster Russian forces in Ukraine, a sign of the group’s expanding role in the war. The Canadian government said Pyongyang’s transaction with the Wagner Group “clearly violates international law and UN security council resolutions”. The top Russian-installed official in Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia region said on Friday that shelling of the Russian-controlled Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant, Europe’s largest, had “almost stopped”. Speaking on Russian state television, governor Yevgeny Balitsky said Russian troops would not leave the nuclear plant, and that it would never return to Ukrainian control. A Russian opposition politician has filed a legal challenge over President Vladimir Putin’s use of the word “war” to describe the conflict in Ukraine. Putin on Thursday publicly acknowledged the situation as a “war” for the first time since he ordered his troops to invade Ukraine in February, after 10 months of calling his campaign a “special military operation”. Ukraine plans to open new embassies in 10 African countries, its president has announced, with the aim of increasing Kyiv’s presence in Africa and strengthening trade ties. There are also plans to develop a “Ukraine-Africa trade house” with offices in the capitals of “the most promising countries” on the African continent, Zelenskiy added.