It’s coming up to 10pm in Kyiv, that’s it from me, Joe Middleton, and the Ukraine-Russia war blog on Boxing Day. Here is what you might have missed: Ukraine’s foreign minister, Dmytro Kuleba, said that his government is aiming to have a peace summit by the end of February. He suggested that the UN’s secretary general, António Guterres, could be the possible mediator for peace talks with Russia.\nThree Russian servicemen have died after a Ukrainian drone attack on a crucial airbase deep inside Russian territory, Moscow has said. According to the defence ministry, a Ukrainian drone was shot down on the approach to Engels base early on Monday morning but falling debris killed three soldiers.\nThe strike was the second recent attack on the airbase, located about 300 miles away from the Ukrainian border and more than 450 miles south-east of Moscow. Earlier this month, three servicemen were killed and two aircraft were damaged during an apparent Ukrainian drone attack on the airbase. The governor of the southern Ukrainian region of Kherson said that 18 people remained in a serious condition after a Russian strike on the city on 24 December. Yaroslav Yanushevich told his Telegram channel that 64 people were injured in the attack, 18 people were in a serious condition, and that 11 people had been killed. Russia’s FSB security service said a Ukrainian “sabotage group” was “liquidated” while trying to enter the Bryansk region on Sunday, Russian state media reported. The alleged saboteurs were armed with foreign-made guns and four improvised explosive devices, the FSB said. There was no immediate comment on the incident from Ukraine. Russian forces launched more than 40 rocket attacks on Ukraine on Sunday, according to Ukraine’s military. Dozens of towns in the Ukrainian regions of Luhansk, Donetsk, Kharkiv, Kherson and Zaporizhzhia were shelled by Moscow’s troops in the previous 24 hours, Ukraine’s military said in an update early on Monday. Vladimir Putin claimed Russia was ready to negotiate with all parties involved in the war in Ukraine, while accusing Kyiv and its western allies of “refusing” to negotiate. In an interview aired on national TV on Sunday, Putin also accused the west of trying to “tear apart” Russia and claimed his offensive in Ukraine aimed to “unite the Russian people”. Russians troops are working “round the clock” at new anti-aircraft missile system positions to defend against missile and air strikes by Ukraine, the Russian Interfax reported late on Sunday, citing the defence ministry. Crews of the S-300V systems were “mastering new position areas” of the Russian long range surface-to-air missile systems, the news agency reported. Russian troops have focused mainly on constructing defensive positions along many sections of the frontline in Ukraine since October, the UK’s Ministry of Defence said. This includes laying additional fields of anti-tank and anti-personnel mines, it said in its latest intelligence update, which would “almost certainly [be] going beyond Russian doctrinal guidelines”. Russian forces’ rate of advance in the Bakhmut area of eastern Ukraine has probably slowed in recent days, according to analysts. In its update on Sunday, the US thinktank the Institute for the Study of War (ISW) cited one Russian military blogger as saying that Ukrainian forces had pushed back elements of Russian private mercenary company the Wagner group to positions they held days ago. Russian-supplied Iskander tactical missile systems, which are capable of carrying nuclear warheads, and S-400 air defence systems have been deployed to Belarus and are prepared to perform their intended tasks, a senior Belarusian defence ministry official has said. It is not clear how many of the Iskander systems have been deployed to Belarus but it follows Putin’s visit to Minsk on 19 December amid concerns in Ukraine that he would pressure Belarus to join a fresh ground offensive and open a new front. Ukraine’s state power grid operator, Ukrenergo, says it introduced emergency shutdowns in multiple regions across the country, including the capital Kyiv, due to an excess of energy consumption. Repair work is ongoing at generating facilities, and several power grids have been damaged due to nine mass Russian attacks, it said in a statement. Volodymyr Zelenskiy has said he spoke to India’s prime minister, Narendra Modi, in a phone call in which he discussed a “peace formula”. Modi’s office said he conveyed India’s support for any peace effort and said both sides should revert to dialogue and diplomacy to find a lasting solution to the conflict in Ukraine. Ukraine has called for Russia to be removed as a permanent member of the security council. The foreign ministry said Russia had illegally occupied “the seat of the USSR in the UN security council” since the break-up of the Soviet Union in 1991, and that its three-decade presence in the UN has been “marked by wars and seizures of other countries’ territories”. Vladimir Putin and his Chinese counterpart, Xi Jinping, will speak before the end of the year, Russian state-owned news agency Tass reported. It provided no details of the timing or format of these talks, citing Kremlin spokesperson Dmitry Peskov as saying the two sides would release details in due course. China’s foreign minister has defended his country’s position on the war in Ukraine and indicated that Beijing will deepen ties with Moscow in the coming year. China will “deepen strategic mutual trust and mutually beneficial cooperation” with Russia, Wang Yi said in a video address on Sunday. A video allegedly shows members of the private Russian mercenary company, Wagner Group, calling the Russian armed force’s chief of general staff a “piece of shit”. Bellingcat’s Christo Grozev reports that Yevgeny Prigozhin, the Russian businessman and founder of Wagner Group, said he has “nothing to say about this video”, which Grozev writes means the Putin ally is essentially endorsing the attack on Gerasimov.