Vladimir Putin has ordered Russia’s defence industry chiefs ensure its army gets all the weapons, equipment and military hardware it needs “in the shortest possible timeframes” to fight in Ukraine. The Russian president also called for their proposals on “addressing the problems that are inevitable” and how to “make sure there are fewer of them”. Putin’s comments in the city of Tula, a centre for Russian arms manufacturing, came just days after he pledged to give his army anything it asked for in a meeting with Russia’s top military officials. The United States has called on Vladimir Putin to acknowledge reality and withdraw troops from Ukraine after he used the word “war” to describe the conflict in Ukraine. Putin on Thursday publicly acknowledged the situation as a “war” for the first time since the February invasion, previously calling his campaign a “special military operation”. A state department spokesperson said: “Finally, after 300 days, Putin called the war what it is.” A Russian opposition politician, Nikita Yuferev, has filed a legal challenge over Putin’s use of the word “war”. Russian forces have been demolishing a theatre in occupied Mariupol in southern Ukraine that was the site of a deadly airstrike believed to have killed hundreds of civilians, according to an aide to the city’s exiled Ukrainian mayor. Ukraine’s culture minister, Oleksandr Tkachenko, said the move was an “attempt to hide forever the evidence of the deliberate killing of Ukrainians by Russians”. Video posted on Ukrainian and Russian websites on Friday showed heavy equipment taking down much of the building. An Amnesty International investigation concluded Russian forces committed a war crime by deliberately targeting the building. Iran is seeking to expand the supply of advanced weapons to Russia, the head of Israel’s Mossad spy agency has said, according to local media. The warning from David Barnea comes after the US this month expressed alarm over a “full-scale defence partnership” between Tehran and Moscow. Russian forces shelled the recently liberated Kherson region 61 times on Thursday, killing one person and injuring two, said the head of the eastern Ukrainian region’s military administration, Yaroslav Yanushevych. About half the strikes hit Kherson city, striking residential blocks, educational institutions and private houses, he said, while a kindergarten was also affected. Two civilians were killed in shelling of the city on Friday morning, according to the regional prosecutor’s office. Two people were injured after a car bomb exploded in the Russian-occupied city of Melitopol in south-eastern Ukraine, according to a local pro-Moscow official. Vladimir Rogov, a Russian-appointed official in Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia province, described the incident as a “terrorist attack” carried out by “militants of the Kyiv regime” to Russian state media. Ivan Fedorov, the exiled mayor of Melitopol, wrote on Telegram that witnesses reported a car was “blown up”. Germany’s vice-chancellor, Robert Habeck, has described the discovery of a German intelligence official suspected of working for Russia as “alarming”, amid fears the offical had access to sensitive information from western allies. The man, an employee of the BND foreign intelligence agency identified as Carsten L, was arrested on suspicion of treason for allegedly passing state secrets to Russia, German prosecutors said. Russia’s ambassador to the US, Anatoly Antonov, warned the risk of a clash between the US and Russia was “high” and compared US-Russia relations to an “ice age” in comments reported by Russia’s state-owned Tass news agency. The Kremlin accused the US of fighting a proxy war against Russia. The Ukrainian president, Volodymyr Zelenskiy, has posted a video saying he is back at work in Kyiv after his landmark visit to Washington this week. “I am in my office – we are working toward victory,” he said in the video, posted to his Telegram channel on Friday. Zelenskiy’s visit to the White House confirmed that Ukraine and the US are “strategic partners” for the first time in history, the Ukrainian leader’s most senior adviser has said. Andriy Yermak, the head of the Ukrainan president’s office, told the Guardian the trip had cemented Zelenskiy’s bond with the US president, Joe Biden, and senior US Republicans. The top Russian-installed official in Ukraine’s Zaporizhzhia region said shelling of the Russian-controlled Zaporizhzhia nuclear power plant had “almost stopped”. Speaking on Russian state television, governor Yevgeny Balitsky said on Friday that Russian troops would not leave the nuclear plant – Europe’s largest – and it would never return to Ukrainian control. Ukraine estimates its grain harvest fell by about 40% year-on-year due to the Russian invasion, a representative for the country’s industry said. “We expect a grain harvest of 65-66 million tonnes” by the end of the year, the head of the Ukrainian Grain Association, Sergiy Ivashchenko, said on Friday, after a record harvest of 106m tonnes last year. “The main reason is the war,” which immediately led to fuel shortages and hindered sowing, he said. Ukraine plans to open new embassies in 10 African countries, Volodymyr Zelenskiy announced, with the aim of increasing Kyiv’s presence in Africa and strengthening trade ties. There were also plans to develop a “Ukraine-Africa trade house” with offices in the capitals of “the most promising countries” on the African continent, he added. Agence France-Presse contributed to this report