Ukrainian refugees in the UK are experiencing difficulties accessing private rented accommodation because they are unable to secure guarantors or references, the Office for National Statistics has revealed. The ONS surveyed nearly 3,000 Ukrainians who fled Russia’s invasion of their country to live in the UK under two visa schemes. The assessment looked at opinions and experiences of those arriving in the UK under the family and “homes for Ukraine” sponsorship schemes. The schemes allow Ukrainian nationals and their family members to come to the UK to live with a named sponsor who can provide accommodation for a minimum of six months. Most respondents say they live with a sponsor – 59% compared with 17% who are renting from a private landlord. However, the ONS said 45% of respondents had experienced barriers to accessing private rented accommodation with “not having a guarantor or references” being the most common reason. One in four respondents – 24% of about 3,000 – say they have changed address since moving to the UK with the most common reason (34% of about 710) being they could now afford to live without being hosted. However, about one in six (16% of about 710) say they have relationship difficulties with their sponsor. Half of respondents say they expect to stay in the UK for three years or longer. The survey also revealed increasing numbers could speak English fluently or a fair amount, rising to 57% from 44% in June 2022. Most adults (56%) reported working in the UK, a significant increase from 19% in June. However, half of respondents experienced difficulties taking up work with the main challenge being English-language skills not meeting job requirements (56%) and qualifications not being recognised or valid in the UK (33%). About 60% of visa holders report having enough money to support themselves and their dependants for the next three months, which the ONS said was a significant increase from 37% in June. Most respondents (72%) said overall they had either very good or good physical and mental health. The minister for housing and homelessness, Felicity Buchan, said: “Our commitment to the Ukrainian people remains steadfast and I am pleased to see so many of those we welcomed to the UK have settled well into their communities. “The fact that 94% of Ukrainians are satisfied with their accommodation speaks volumes of the generosity of our sponsors and I want to thank our hosts, community groups and councils across the country who have supported Ukrainians. “We are engaging with landlord organisations to resolve any issues on renting to Ukrainians and have provided guidance and local authority funding that can be used for this. Where this is not possible councils have a duty to ensure no Ukrainian family is left without a roof over their head.”