Japan’s faltering campaign to raise its birthrate has gone analogue, with authorities in a south-western city encouraging potential suitors to put pen to paper and wait patiently for a reply rather than simply swiping right. The city of Miyazaki says hundreds of men and women have dabbled in old-fashioned letter writing since the matchmaking scheme was launched two years ago. While there have been no wedding bells, the programme has spawned 32 face-to-face meetings and brought together 17 couples. About 450 people have signed up so far – more than double the city’s initial estimate – with about 70% in their 20s or 30s. “It takes longer [than online dating], and inspires you to imagine the person you’re in communication with,” Rie Miyata, the head of a local consulting firm commissioned to run the scheme, told Agence France-Presse. “It’s less about how good your penmanship is and more the fact that you write every single character sincerely and with care, thinking deeply about the person you’re writing to. That’s what makes letters so powerful.” Applicants are screened and paired based on information such as their taste in books and films. To encourage participants to base their decision on the other correspondent’s personality, profile photos are forbidden.\nPeople who have been paired can send and receive up to five letters without divulging their name or address, according to the Mainichi Shimbun. If they wish to meet, the consulting firm provides them with the contact details. After that they are left to their own devices, the newspaper said. The letter scheme is one of a number of attempts to encourage Japan’s singletons to meet and, perhaps, marry and start families, as the country battles a low birthrate and shrinking population. The government has started funding artificial intelligence matchmaking schemes, and in 2018 single men from the mountain village of Otari produced a calendar showing them at work in the hope of finding love and companionship.\nThe number of babies born in Japan sank to a record low of 811,604 last year – a statistic that the prime minister, Fumio Kishida, on Tuesday described as “shocking”. Japanese women are now expected to have an average of 1.3 children, far below the rate needed to maintain the population at current levels. Mirroring social trends in other developed economies, more people are choosing to marry later or not at all. A recent government survey found that one in four single people in their 30s said they had no desire to tie the knot, with many saying they feared married life would be too expensive and infringe on their freedom. But a 25-year-old man taking part in the Miyazaki matchmaking scheme said the idea had brought back fond memories of his school days. “As a kid I used to write letters to the girl I had a crush on,” he said. “I like how old-fashioned letters are. That made me want to join.”